Antenna Fundamentals
====================

INTRODUCTION
------------

Wireless communication became a reality after the invention of the
antenna. Antenna is an integral part of any Wireless Communication
system; whether it is fixed communication or Mobile communication. The
invention of Radio in 1895 gave birth to Wireless Communications. The
initial experimental contributions of Hertz (1857-1894) of Germany
helped in understanding the generation and transmission of
Electromagnetic wave. However, the great genius Guglielmo Marconi
(1874-1937) was responsible for realizing practical, reliable radio
communications through his far reaching inventions. Thus he is regarded
as 'Father of Radio'. Marconi's relentless efforts made it possible for
long distance communication using Radio waves. The advances in long
distance communication in Radio, Radio broadcasting, Television, Radar,
Satellite Communications, Mobile Communication, and Information
Superhighways had their beginnings in Marconi's experiments on wireless.
Wireless Communication has made great impact on the living standards of
the human society from time to time. Today if we are able to connect and
communicate globally in a short time to any part of the world, it is due
to these advances in Radio Communications. Antenna is one of the very
important devices in Radio Communications. There are a large variety of
antennas which are used in different applications. However, all these
antennas operate according to the fundamental Principles of
Electromagnetic theory.

The discovery of Electromagnetic induction by Michael Faraday
(1791-1867) in 1831 demonstrated that a changing magnetic field can
produce electric current. Further, the discovery of Electromagnetic
theory of light, and the field and wave equations of Electromagnetic
field by James Clark Maxwell (1831-1979) formed the major basis for the
Electromagnetic waves. It was Maxwell who gave the theoretical
foundations for a unified theory of Electricity and Magnetism and
propounded the Electromagnetic theory. It was a decade later, Heinrich
Hertz (1857-1894), a German Scientist, who experimentally demonstrated
the generation of Electromagnetic waves and their propagation in free
space. His concept of Hertzian doublet antenna is the basis for many
antennas. However, the discoveries of Hertz were confined to the
laboratory. Many scientists including Jagadeesh Chandra Bose (JC Bose
1858-1937) in India conducted investigations on the findings of Hertz.
J.C.Bose built a Microwave spectrometer, which has now become an
essential part of microwave communication link. Popov (1859-1905) of
Russia devised a radio antenna to detect electromagnetic radiation from
lightning. Also Oliver Lodge (8151-1940) of England and Augusto Righi
(1858-1937) in Italy also had continued their studies on Electromagnetic
waves. Lodge gave a lecture-cum-demonstration on the transmission and
reception of Electromagnetic waves in 1894. Righi had given lectures on
Hertzian waves at the University of Bologna in 1894.

Marconi, in 1894 read the experimental findings of Hertz in 1894 and
repeated Hertz's experiments. He used Hertzian waves to send messages.
He was able to transmit telegraph signals over a distance of 10 meters.
Later he improvised the system for long distance communication. He used
130m long copper wire antenna. In 1932, he demonstrated Microwave
communication at 50cm between Rome and Sardinia, distance of 270km.
However, after Marconi's wireless, the Modern Communications has seen
several advances. There are several kinds of antennas and several
structures which are used in variety of applications. With the
activities of the mankind expanding into space, the need for antennas
also has grown enormously. Therefore antenna will provide link to outer
space and from there to any other point. The usage of antennas in normal
Communication will be extended to reach the Stars. In the era of
Internet and Mobile Cellular Communications, newer antenna systems also
have been developed to be more miniaturized.

Antenna Types
-------------

Antennas have different configurations and types. However, we can
broadly classify antennas into four major types as follows.

### WIRE ANTENNAS

It can also be a loop antenna as shown in
fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig1"}(b) or it
can be a long wire antenna as in
fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig1"}(c) whose
length will be $l = 4\lambda \; to \; 8\lambda$. It can be a helical
wire antenna as shown in fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:fig1"}(d).

![(a) Dipole with $l=\lambda/2$, (b) loop antenna, (c) long wire antenna
(Rhombic antenna), (d) Helical
antenna](assets/figures/ch1/fig1.png){#fig:fig1 width="0.7\\linewidth"}

They are the most commonly used antennas. They are found on automobiles,
buildings, and spacecrafts.

They are of various shapes: -

Straight wire dipole fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:fig1"}(a), loop antennas
fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig1"}(b),
helical antennas fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:fig1"}(c) and long wire non-resonant antennas
fig [1.1](#fig:fig1){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig1"}(d). Wire
antennas are derived from transmission line.

### APERTURE ANTENNAS

![(a) Conical Horn, (b) Rectangular
Horn](assets/figures/ch1/fig2.png){#fig:fig2 width="0.7\\linewidth"}

These are high frequency antennas and are derived from wave guides.
These antennas have their shapes of horn: either square or circular
aperture. They can be mounted conveniently on aircrafts and spacecrafts.
The structure of horn antennas are shown in
fig [1.2](#fig:fig2){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig2"}(a) and
fig [1.2](#fig:fig2){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig2"}(b).
These antennas are extensively used as primary feed antennas to excite
UHF and Microwave antennas. In particular, they are used as primary
feeds for parabolic reflector antennas.

###  MICROWAVE ANTENNAS

The antennas used at Microwave frequency will have to work in the
frequency range of several GHz. At such high frequencies the wavelength
will be in mm. Therefore it is possible to have antenna dimensions of
several orders of magnitude greater than the wavelength. The EM waves at
microwaves can be treated in terms of rays. We apply principles of
geometrical optics to analyze them. The principles of focusing and
collimation can be applied to microwave antennas. Therefore several
physical shapes and structures are possible at microwaves. A few of the
microwave antennas are

-   Parabolic reflector antennas as shown in
    fig [1.3](#fig:fig3){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig3"}(a),

-   Lens antennas shown in fig [1.3](#fig:fig3){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:fig3"}(b)

-   Micro strip antennas

![(a) Parabolic Reflector, (b) Lens
antenna](assets/figures/ch1/fig3.png){#fig:fig3 width="0.7\\linewidth"}

### ARRAY ANTENNAS

Single antenna may not provide the necessary directivity and other
characteristics. Then, two or more antenna elements laid out in parallel
or in line with each other form an array. These provide very high
directivity and the desired pattern. Arrays of dipoles as well as arrays
of parabolic reflectors are used in Radio Telescopes to receive signals
from astronomical objects. The array of dipoles is shown in
Fig [1.4](#fig:fig4){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig4"}(a)

![(a) Array of dipoles, (b) Array of parabolic
antennas](assets/figures/ch1/fig4.png){#fig:fig4 width="0.7\\linewidth"}

Microwave antenna Arrays are used in RADAR, Satellite communications,
Radio astronomy, Radio telescope, etc. The Radio Telescope at Ootacamand
(Ooty) is around 1.6 km long consisting of array of parabolic reflector
antennas, whereas an antenna array of dipoles in two dimensions at
Gowribidnur Radio telescope is several thousand square meters in area.

DEFINITION OF AN ANTENNA AND PRINCIPLES OF RADIATION
----------------------------------------------------

Antenna is a device used for radiating or receiving Electromagnetic
waves. It can be defined as a transitional structure between the free
space and a guiding device or vice-versa.

The guiding structure can be a transmission line or a co-axial cable or
a wave guide. These are used to transport electromagnetic energy from
the transmitter to the antenna or from antenna to the receiver as shown
in fig [1.5](#fig:fig5){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig5"}.A
transmission line guides the EM energy from the transmitter to the
antenna. The antenna radiates the EM waves. The antenna used to radiate
electromagnetic energy at the transmitter is called the Transmitting
antenna, while the antenna which receives the

![Communication system](assets/figures/ch1/fig5.png){#fig:fig5
width="0.7\\linewidth"}

EM energy that is traversing from transmitter to receiver is called the
Receiving antenna. Antenna is a reciprocal device. In addition to
radiating or receiving EM waves, an antenna is required to radiate
energy in some chosen directions and suppress it in the other
directions. Therefore an antenna has to act as a directional device in
addition to be a probing device. Antenna is an interface between a
circuit and free space. The circuit can be a transmitter or a receiver.

The radiation of electromagnetic energy takes place due to accelerated
charge. This can be expressed by the relation

$$\frac{dI}{dt}l \; = \; Q\frac{dv}{dt}$$ where $\frac{dI}{dt}$ is the
time changing current in ampere/second, $l$ is the length of the current
element in meter, $Q$ is the charge in coulomb, $\frac{dv}{dt}$ is the
rate of change of velocity (the acceleration of charge in $m/s^2$).

Thus there will be radiation of energy either due to time changing
current or due to accelerated change. For sinusoidal inputs, it is due
to current and for pulses it is due to charge. The power is proportional
to $$\left( \frac{dI}{dt} \right)^2 or \left( Q\frac{dv}{dt}\right)^2$$

We know that a transmission line guides the electromagnetic energy
bounded by the region within the conductors. It travels as transverse
electromagnetic waves.

However, an antenna is required to radiate energy rather than guiding
the energy. A transmission line can be made to radiate EM energy by
flaring it out at the ends. An opened out transmission line converts
plane wave to spherical waves and the field associated with them will
move forward. Thus an electromagnetic energy is launched into free space
by an opened out transmission line. Thus this device is called an
antenna or an aerial. The term Antenna is used in the United States and
the term aerial is used in the UK and Europe. A transmitting antenna
launches a free space wave. This wave can travel over the upper
atmosphere above the earth's surface over longer distances. These
traversing EM waves can be intercepted by an antenna at the receiver
point and produce a voltage at its terminals which allows flow of
current through the receiving apparatus. In summary, an antenna has the
function of accepting the energy from the guiding structure (a
transmission line) and then radiating the energy into free space in
desired directions. This function is done at the transmitting end.
However, the same antenna may be used at the Receiver to intercept the
EM waves and obtain a power corresponding to the incoming
electromagnetic energy. Thus an antenna is a reciprocal device. The
process of radiation is illustrated in fig. An antenna is analogous to
an eye.

Fig 1.3.2

Antenna interfaces electrons on conductors and photons in space. We know
that a field is a region where electric or magnetic forces act. The
electric and magnetic fields in free space wave traveling outward at a
large distance from an antenna convey energy called Radiation.

NEAR FIELD AND FAR FIELDS OF AN ANTENNA
---------------------------------------

Radio waves are usually referred to as Electromagnetic waves which
consist of electric and magnetic fields. Whenever a voltage is applied
to an antenna, an electric field will be setup. The voltage causes a
current to flow. This in turn produces a magnetic field. The electric
and magnetic fields will be at right angles to each other. These fields
are emitted from an antenna and travel through the space over very long
distances. The direction of propagation is perpendicular to both
electric and magnetic fields.

The field due to an antenna responsible for propagation in space over
long distance is called the radiation field or far field. There is
another field called near field or induction field very close to the
antenna element. This is due to the field produced because of the
current flowing through the element. This produces a magnetic field in
the vicinity of the conductor. This field is stronger near the antenna
and hence it is called near field or induction field. The boundary
between the near field and the far field is given in terms of the
dimensions of the antenna and the wave length of the EM wave. The sketch
shown in fig5 indicates the regions of near field and far field of an
antenna

![Near & Far field of an antenna](assets/figures/ch1/fig7.png){#fig:fig7
width="0.7\\linewidth"}

The space surrounding the antenna is subdivided into three regions as
shown in fig [1.6](#fig:fig7){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:fig7"}
as

1.  Reactive near field region

2.  Radiating near field region (Fresnel Zone)

3.  Far field region (Fraunhoffer Zone)

There are empirical relations to find the near field and far field
regions of an antenna. The boundary between near field and far field is
$$R \; = \; \frac{2D^2}{\lambda}$$ where $D$ is the length of the
antennas and $\lambda$ is the wave length of the Em wave
$$\lambda \: = \: \frac{c}{f} \:=\: \frac{velocity \: of \: light}{frequency}$$

When the point of determination of the field emitted by the antenna is
greater than $R$, i.e., $\left(R\:>\:\frac{2D^2}{\lambda}\right)$ , then
that point will be in the far field zone. Hence for radiation field to
be present, the distance from the antenna should be greater than
$R\:=\:\frac{2D^2}{\lambda} \:metres$. The field components in the far
field region are transverse. For an Antenna the far field is the one
that determines the Radiation field.

However the near field region is further subdivided into two as

1.  *Reactive near field zone* - This is defined as that region of the
    field immediately surrounding the aerial.

2.  *Radiation near field* is the region between the far field region
    and reactive near field region.

The boundary between the two near field regions is given by

$R_1\;=\;0.62\sqrt{\frac{D^3}{\lambda}}$

For an antenna, both the fields exist.

**Illustration 1:** Field measurements were made on an antenna of size
50m at a distance of 1km from the antenna. The frequency of the wave is
100MHz. Find whether the point is in the far field region or near field
region.

**Solution**

![image](assets/figures/ch1/fig8.png){width="0.7\\linewidth"}
[\[fig:fig8\]]{#fig:fig8 label="fig:fig8"}

$$R\;=\;\frac{2D^2}{\lambda}$$
$$D\;\rightarrow\; Size \:of\: the\: antenna$$ $$D\;=\;50m$$

$$\lambda\:=\:\frac{c}{f}\:=\:\frac{3\times10^8}{100\times10^6}\;=\;3m$$

$$\therefore R\;=\;\frac{2\times50\times50}{3}\;=\;\frac{5000}{3}\;=\;\frac{5}{3}\;=\;1.67km$$

The point of measurement is at 1km from the antenna. This is less than
R. $\therefore$ The point of determination of field is in the near field
zone. Further we can examine whether this point is in the Reactive Near
field or Radiating Near field
$$R_1\;=\;0.62\sqrt{\frac{D^3}{\lambda}}\;=\;0.62\sqrt{\frac{50\times50\times50}{3}}\;=\;0.62\sqrt{\frac{125\times10^3}{3}}$$
$$R_1\;=\;0.124km$$ $\therefore$ The point is in Radiating near field
region.

**Illustration 2:** At a distance of $r = 1m$ from a particular short
dipole, the induction field component of the total field is equal in
strength to the far field. At $r = 10m$ in the same direction which of
these is stronger? How much stronger?

**Solution:** At the boundary between the near field and the far field
of an antenna the two fields are equal i.e., at
$R\;=\;\frac{2D^2}{\lambda}$ the two fields are equal at point A.
![image](assets/figures/ch1/fig9.png){width="0.7\\linewidth"}
[\[fig:fig9\]]{#fig:fig9 label="fig:fig9"}

At $r = 10m$ (point B), this is in the radiation field zone. In the far
field zone, the far field component is stronger as it is proportional to
$\frac{1}{r}$, while near field is weaker as it is proportional to
$\frac{1}{r^2}$
$$\frac{E_{far\;field}}{E_{near\;field}}\;=\;\frac{E_0\left(\frac{1}{r}\right)}{E_0\left(\frac{1}{r^2}\right)}\;=\;r\;=\;10$$

The far field is ten times stronger.
